Oh, it was just so cold. After a while, one gets to
where they can only think about one thing, and
that's getting on the ground.
Just to get on the ground, you'd fly into it.
It was that kind of an approach.
for me and I damn near
wiped it out hitting the ground. And with so cold it
wouldn't have even cared. There was no heater
units at all in the plane? No, there was no heat in
airplanes at those days.
Even if, you know, there was in a couple of them. But
it wasn't effective enough. You just had to wear
enough clothes. to keep yourself warm, and that's
impossible when you're at those kind of altitudes
and that kind of weather. You just can't do it.
It
can get cold enough that you don't care, no matter
what it is. You just don't care. Did you crash on
this landing? No, I got by with it all right. We had
others, and it didn't happen to me, but we had
others that would come in there and at other
places, and it would be so cold they couldn't get
out of the cockpit and sail them back. Really? You
could run a lift over there. It didn't have
forklifts as such at that time, but it's like a
forklift. You lift them up and take them inside.
put them in a cloth of ice and warm them up. That's
painful. That didn't happen to me. You flew the
mail for about two and a half months then in 1934?
Yes, my unit did. I wasn't just by myself. Of course
not. My unit was involved in the mail. And then what
did you do? Well, this was the 11th Bombardment
Squadron of the 7th Bomb Group when it was
stationed at Marsh Field, California. And when we
got over the airmail, we were receiving our new
airplanes, the Martin B-10s, which was probably
the greatest, biggest, fastest airplane in the
world at that time. And so we started immediately
training
and developing this as a bombardment airplane and
squadron and group and strategy. spent our time
learning how to use this airplane, how to bomb with
it, how to navigate with it, how to fight with it,
how to avoid the pursuit aircraft and this was the
only time in history up to that time that the bomber
was faster than the fighter, so we had fun. We could
thumb our nose at them and go off and leave them at
25, 30,000 feet and go on and bomb our target and
come home and get away from them. We had a bunch of
frustrated pursuers, I thought, all day. And we
developed the tactics for bombardment that were
used on
into World War II. Had to be modified some, but They
were used over Germany during the war. And what
were those tactics? Well, it's a method of attack.
They would fill several volumes of the book. It's a
method of
getting to your target, getting onto it. and
delivering your load and getting away. And there
are many, many variations of it, but we worked it
out. Taking off from fields out with no lights,
navigating to the target with no lights, turning
in and attacking the target from various
altitudes at 10 second intervals.
and leaving by separate routes in the dark. All
this sounds like not very much, but it puts the heat
on everybody, I'll tell you, when you've got six or
eight hundred airplanes up in an area of various
altitudes going various places. You have to be a
little bit careful with that. to be on time. And of
course, this is still during the Depression. With
the B-10 now, did you get, this is a new airplane,
did you get a lot more new equipment? Yes. As
equipment went, we did. New radios and other
things like that, although in terms of today's
equipment, why, it's really insignificant. But
as of then, yes, we did. Well, we didn't get a lot of
them. We only had one group, for example. The
United States Air Force at that time, well, there
should have been 10 or 12 or 15 groups.
But with the one that we had, well, we really did do
it. And how many planes and pilots did you have in a
group? Well, a group at that time was three
squadrons. Each squadron was twenty-four
airplanes.
You'd have usually thirty-six pilots,
twenty-four airplanes, and other things that go
with
them. That was during this period of time that the
Macon went down off of West Coast. We were having
terrible problems with the Navy in terms of
whether we could fly and fight over the sea or not.
That seemed kind of like a ridiculous thing in
retrospect, but it was deadly serious at that
time. And the winner of winning or losing the
argument made told the story as to whether you got
any money or not. So it was a real lot of bitter
fights. And I was involved in nearly all of those
missions that
we had Navy problems with. That was also part of the
development. Most of them off the west coast of
California, then. Yes. Yes. Right. And so at this
time there was a heck of a lot of inter-service
rivalry. Yes, particularly between Air Force and
Navy. There wasn't so much other rivalry at that
time. The Air Force and Navy was real, real serious
rivalry. And how successful were you bombing out
at sea? Very. Especially with the new B-10s. Yes,
well the B-10s we could reach out, you see. a
significant distance. Three and four hundred
miles offshore.
I was just thinking on one of the first missions we
went out and intercepted the Army transport Megs
that was on its way in from the Philippines.
And since we couldn't bomb the Megs, obviously,
one of our planes went down and dropped an aluminum
slick. It was just a bag that had some aluminum
powder in it, hit on the water and make a slick
circle that you can see. And we bombed that and went
on back. Before we landed back at Hamilton, that's
where we were operating from at that time. The Navy
had already reported the thing to the Secretary of
War and they had word there for the commander to
report to Washington before he even got back on the
ground again from the mission.
So they were dead serious about it.
Now when did the amount of inter-service rivalry
start to decline between the Air Corps and the
Navy? Well, I think it built right on from there.
Well, it didn't start there, but it kept right on
building
until it finally culminated or peaked, I guess, in
the B-36 argument in Washington in about 48, I
believe it was, 48, 49.
But the thing that finally stopped it, not stopped
it, but made it entirely different was the fact
that
the missile obviously came in and it was going to
take over and dominate everything. And it would be
used by all three services, depending upon their
uses for it. And it was so damned expensive that
each of the service was going to have problems
enough Just funding the one that they had to have,
not the ones they liked to have. So I think that
ended it pretty much. And how long did you stay out
in California training here? It says that you went
down to the canals on this one. Well, I was in
California from February of 34 when we got there to
Marshfield and then we moved to Hamilton in
December of 35. And I was there until about the 1st
of November of 37, training with the 7th Bomb
Group. And then I transferred to Fransfield in
California, still in bombardment. That's where
the 6th Bomb Group was at Fransfield. And still
training. It's still the same mission. Yes,
that's right. Well, Air Force, its mission is
training. I mean, we were doing other things, but
the mission is training and development of
doctrine and qualifying of people, having people
so they can be ready to do whatever it is that they
need doing. ASU went on with that. I got out of the
squadron to Hamilton Field and became the
assistant group operations officer. So I got some
experience at group level while I was there.
Were you promoted at that time? No. You were still a
second lieutenant? Yes, let me see.
there were so many of those that they're kind of
hard to keep up with unless they're referred to the
notes. But at that time, you had people in the Air
Force who were lieutenants, who had been
lieutenants for seventeen, eighteen years. And I
went on active duty, of course, as a cadet for a
year, and then the Second Lieutenant Air Reserve
for
Oh, I guess three years. I'd have to look it up. I
think that's right. And I was promoted to first
lieutenant, Air Reserve. And then finally I got my
regular commission in October 1938 and went back
to second lieutenant, regular Air Force, regular
Army. Now, did you take a drop in pay when you went
from first lieutenant down to second lieutenant?
Oh, yeah. Well, sure. Then I was promoted to first
lieutenant Army of the United States, which is
slightly different a little bit later, and then
finally the First Lieutenant in the regular Air
Force. I think I've got six There are different
categories, different times and all that. It adds
up to a very confused picture. It's a function of
the times. Now, of course, the times were the
Depression and many of the men, like you said, were
lieutenants for seventeen, eighteen years.
People were frozen in rank. How was the morale of
the officer corps? Well,
it was good. They
don't like those things, but those were hard times
for everybody. The morale of the farmers weren't
very good, or the ranchers, or the accountants, or
anybody else. So comparatively, I think it's
good. They had people still striving hard to do the
very best that they could to make something out of
whatever they had. What did you think of the
quality of those early pilots? Oh, I got nothing
but praise, real praise for them. Very good, I
think. Real fine. They were a
real fine guy. One of the men that I was assistant to
as a squadron operations officer was a man named
Walker,
who was killed, lost in the Pacific right after the
Battle of Midway.
But he had been the commander of that squadron, the
11th Bomb Squadron, when it was created in France
in World War I, and had flown with it in that
capacity over there in World And he had in the
meantime done an awful lot of studying as a
strategist and so I joined with him and two other
people in trying to write a manual on bombardment.
It was the first manual we ever had and it got
finished and was you.
They were great people, I thought. Take
these hardships in stride and go right on. I've
heard that in the early, or during the 1930s,
before the war, there was some problem of
discipline in the Army Air Corps, and there were a
lot of people flying underneath bridges and
things like that. Did you ever have any problem
with discipline? A lot of aerial acrobatics.
flying discipline and that kind of thing. Well,
sure.
There's a lot of problems. There were a lot of
instances of disciplinary action, whether it was
a problem or not, depending upon who you were and
how you were looking at it. To the Army commander on
to or with whom this air unit was associated, who
didn't like the Air Force to start with, it was a
pretty big problem.
If you look at the guy who
was guilty of this great breach of discipline, it
didn't amount to a damn usually.
the Army was very jealous of the Air Corps,
particularly of people, pilots, because they
drew more money, flying pay. And the other people
didn't draw the flying pay, because they didn't
fly. But they were very jealous of it. Now, you were
an artillery to begin with, and then you became a
pilot. I know it was on the Why did you, why were you
attracted to the Air Corps? Why didn't you decide
to, why didn't you go into the artillery? Well,
even during that time, pilots on airlines were
drawn 1,800 bucks a month.
And it was, it was something that at first,
It had the other attraction of three meals a day to
go along with it. There was absolutely nothing for
a person to do in terms of a job. Any place you could
find a job was something. Of course after I got into
it there were all kinds of attractions. There were
lots of places to go in terms of things to be done.
And the B-10 showed that there was a way to do it.
Pilots also had, well, the guy in the dark leather
jacket and the glasses. There was some bit of
glamour to the job early on and throughout the war,
Errol Flynn and all of that. Were you ever
attracted to any of that glamour? No, I genuinely
wasn't. But there's a lot more to those leather
jackets and glasses than glamour. It makes a
difference in whether you survive or not. Yeah,
yeah. But you know what I'm talking about. Yes, I
do. And I was proud of them.
I didn't think about it as being the glamour, but I
think about it as representing what I was doing.
And I was quite proud of them. Now 1937, in November
1937, is that when you went down to the Panama
Canal? Yes. Now why did they send you? Why? Well,
for two reasons. First place, I'd requested it.
And secondly, they needed people down there to do
what I could do. And so they acceded to my request
and sent me down. Okay, so you were a squadron's
operation officer and group operations officer
for how long? Oh, that's until I went to Costa Rica.
It was about two years. Okay, from 37 to 39. Yeah.
Okay. And your function there was the defense of
the Canal Zone. Yes, that's right. We were the only
bombardment unit in the Canal Zone. Navy had some
patrol units, Albrook had some fighter units, but
we were the only bombardment unit, and we had an
observation squad in there.
During that period of time, you see, 38, 39, when
the war in Europe was doing lots of things,
It did many things to us. We were trying to get
ready. We, I don't mean in the squadron. I'm
talking we nationally were trying to get ready to
do whatever it was going to be necessary for us to
do. But in the meantime, the British were needing
everything that we could possibly turn loose to
spare them, and we were turning loose an awful lot.
So we weren't, our own forces were not getting it.
We were expanding the personnel of the Corps as
rapidly as we could, and that put a premium demand
on whatever experience that you had. So
experience got thinner and thinner and thinner.
And at one time down there at France Field before I
was ordered out of there,
There were five officers on the whole base, and I
had seven different jobs all at the same time. They
were cut that thin.
But it
shows you what you can do. What did you think of the
defense capabilities of the Panama Canal back
then, right before the Second World War erupted?
What did I think of its capabilities to defend
itself? Yes. Well,
it would have had a very difficult time defending
itself against any reasonable threat. I don't
mean that as a criticism, because the people who
have the resources have to make an evaluation and
allocate those resources where they think they'd
be needed. And I would have agreed with them not to
allocate them to the Panama Canal, because I think
we had enough stuff in place to handle that. But if
there had been a serious threat, . How
many bombers, how many pilots did you have? In
Panama?
Well, by that time we probably only had
like six or eight bombing airplanes. Down there,
okay. They had other aircraft, fighters and
attack aircraft
that could have, would have been used, but we
didn't have
We did not have a significant bombardment force
stationed there. Anti-submarine aircraft
phased through depending upon what was happening
out in the Caribbean. So at various times there
were different kinds of capabilities, but on
station there was not a significant bombardment
capability. How are the relations of the
Panamanians? Well at that time they were
reasonably well workable. There were problems,
but they weren't too significant. They
didn't really get significant until after the
war. There were a few incidents, but not very many.
Okay. And what was your opinion when President
Carter signed the agreement to return the Panama
Canal? Well, I'd hate to express it in the real
terms that I feel. As far as I'm concerned, the
whole thing is an act of treason.
Not just Carter, but all the things that go with it.
I feel very strongly that it should not have been
done.
During this time back in the 30s, of course,
Franklin Roosevelt had a good neighbor policy in
Latin America, and often he had American fliers
make goodwill trips to some of the Latin and South
American capitals. Did you take any of those
trips? I didn't take any of the—well, yes, I did,
too. I took one of the goodwill trips.
You noticed my next assignment on there. Sure,
yeah. While in that assignment, of course, I did
almost 100 percent of my work was in that lot. And I
headed two or three goodwill trips into other
countries from Panama while I was on that other
assignment. And I made two, I think, before I went
on that assignment. I didn't lead them or what not,
but I participated in two of them. Where were they,
two? One was to Guatemala, from Panama, and
one was to Costa Rica. I think that's the only two I
participated in. How well were they received?
Very, very well indeed. Very well indeed.
It was a very necessary and very constructive
thing.
Now you left there in 1939 to go on to be the
assistant military assay for air for Guatemala,
El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica,
Panama, and Colombia. Where were you
headquartered? Headquarters in San Jose, Costa
Rica.
worked out of San Jose to cover all the rest of that
country. No kidding. Now they probably have air
out of shade every single one of those countries.
Well, I think they did have
before this Nicaraguan thing stirred up. I don't
know what the situation is right now. And what do
you think about, whenever you're in NSJ, of
course, you're in somewhat of a diplomatic
position. What do you think of that type of
position, which is very different from being a
military pilot? Yes, it is. When I went on that job,
the State Department people thought of me as an
airplane jockey. And they reminded me I rank with
but under the vice council.
My determination was to make it something other
than that, and I did. So I made my own name both in the
State Department and in G2 Intelligence in
Washington, which was of course our parent
department.
So I got everybody's mind changed by the time I
left. Would you explain what was the problem? What
do you mean you got their minds changed? Have you
been overseas very much in having to deal with the
State Department? No, not with the
State Department. The State Department at that
time, and some people would say it's just as bad
now, although I wouldn't, were a very superior
people in their own estimation. And anything that
anyone did in a foreign country to which they were
assigned,
they were God's children to make the moral
determination as to whether it was right or not and
be critical and do whatever else their wisdom
called for in terms of family in that country.
And they spent long hours to be goddamn sure you
understood that, whoever you happened to be. And
this worked insofar as members of your family are
concerned, everybody else.
Well, that's something I didn't like very much.
But I was there not because I liked to be there, but
there to do a job, so I handled myself in such a way as
to best do that job.
But one of the ways, one of the things I had to do to do
it was to gain some respect
for 2nd Lieutenant's Air Force, because I was the
first one of them that had ever been on a job like
that.
So I had to get better at their business than they
were at their business in many respects in order to
do that, which I think I did. But I had the advantage
of them in many ways. And I got personally to know
the presidents of all those people, their
ministers of foreign affairs and everything
else. And I could go and call them whenever I wanted
to. and after I had done it a few times they began to
call for me to come to see them rather than some
other people who otherwise would have gone. I
think I had the record in that I had breakfast with
four presidents one morning in their respective
palaces before ten o'clock in the morning.
Guatemala, to Salvador, to Honduras, to
Nicaragua, to Costa Rica.
And I had a message for them. They knew that. And
so they had their cars to the airport to meet me, and
I went straight and had breakfast with each of them
on the way. What was the message? Do you remember?
the U.S. was going to take over all German and
Italian ships on the high seas, which really meant
the ones that were in port in their countries
couldn't get out. And it meant that if they wanted
them, they had to act that day to take them over,
which they did. sent troops aboard to command, to
control the ships. And that's when so many of them
were scuttled in the ports and tried to block the
harbor and everything else down there. Now was
there, of course this must have been December 8th
or 9th or something like that, 1941, right after we
got into, right after Pearl Harbor. No, it was
before that. I've forgotten when it was. See, we
had them blocked up quite a long while before Pearl
Harbor. And the Le Monde Bay in Panama was full of
ships long before that. And they couldn't get out
of there. The Rene Adore and the Andre Adore,
and dozens of them that were tied up there. And they
were tied up for, had been for a year by that time.
Afraid to get, as soon as they go through that gate,
either
somebody would get them, British submarines, or
we would take them in tow or something. So they were
sitting out on the east side of the canal then? On
each end of the canal, yes. That's right, they
were. But there were also ships in Punta Arenas and
Costa Rica and Puerto Barrios and Guatemala and
other ports in the other countries along there.
that those countries had been allowing to
stay in port and fly their own flag and take care of
their own business. But the next day they were all
in a different status. They put their own troops
aboard and taken them all.
Was there a big fear of German influence? Oh, yes.
It wasn't just a fear. It was a reality. It wasn't
too bad in Central America, or not nearly as bad as
it was in South America, and particularly in
Columbia. One of the reasons I later moved to
Columbia from that was to facilitate the takeover
a Colombian airline,
which was owned,
oh, ninety-some percent by a German airline. And I
became as good friends as you can with an enemy. to
their chief pilot, Colonel Boyle, who was down
there.
And we finally did get the government of Columbia
and Pan American to get together and act
to get the Germans out of there. And I picked up one
of the German Junker airplanes and flew it out of
there and flew it back to Panama Canal.
That was just incidental to the job. The job was to
get Pan American to take them over. You must have
engaged in
quite a bit of intelligence gathering. You betcha
I did. I bet I could. Sure did. An investigation of
reports is one of the big jobs they have there, and I
had some problems with that, but
there were reports, persistent reports, of an
area in the Amazon basin where the Germans and
Italians, or both, were supposed to be equipping
long-range airplanes to fly out of there and close
the canal. And there were persistent reports
coming out of there of that, and you couldn't get an
answer to it. But at that time, I had a C-45, which is
a bimotored Beechcraft airplane.
And with its regular gas tanks on it, it's got about
miles, maybe, range, something like that. But
when I got it, I had two extra tanks put in, one in the
nose and one in the tail. But that still only gave me
a little over 700, 750 miles of rain.
To do this, I needed more gasoline than that. So I
did something that was kind of silly, but it
worked. I went to Via Vicentio, which is just over
the mountains down in the Llanos back of Bogota in
Colombia.
We had a bunch of 35-gallon gasoline drums, filled
them up and put them in the cabin of the airplane.
Eleven of them. I think it was a little hole. And
arranged a way that I could pump out of that barrel
out through my window and into the tank on the wing.
So I took off from the Vicencio and went direct to
Leticia, which is where Columbia, a little tid of
it, comes onto the Amazon. And then I followed the
Amazon down to nearly even to Manaus, and went over
and investigated this area that they talked about
and photographed it, and flew back to Manaus and up
the Orianoco to Venezuela. where the META and the
Orinoco joined, and then I flew down the META back
to Villasencio.
About 2350 miles in one flight, one airplane. And
we started about 3 o'clock in the morning, late in
the afternoon. We were getting late in the
afternoon when we came back.
But I was, and I never had a ceiling of more than 400
feet that whole damn day until I got clear back up to
Oriental, to the Oriental, which meant a good many
hours of flying that treetop blind, and I was the
only pilot. And boy, I had my crew chief and a
photographer was the only thing that I had in
there. Well, did you see anything, any pictures?
Well, I found the location, and I found a lot of the
things that people had been talking about. For
example?
They called it hangers. They were big barns and
lumber sheds and whatnot. But I photographed the
whole thing and brought the photograph back for
interpretation.
There was nothing there of the nature of the things
that they were talking about. But it did enable us
to close out the problem. and get it over with,
where you could spend an awful lot of time chasing
it down or thinking about it or trying to get
somebody in there. It was a thousand miles from
almost any place down in that jungle away. It would
take months and cost mints to get people in there to
find out. You'd get most of them killed anyway.
So we got them out. when we were coming back down the
Meta, coming home.
There's no navigation age. You're still
navigating by dead right now.
I flew into a rain storm, which of course you do
quite often. We were only about 300 miles north of
the Amazon. I was down below the trees on the Meta
River flying in this rain storm. which is not a good
thing to do in most circumstances. I didn't do it
just for fun. I mean, I had to hit where I was going. I
couldn't afford to miss it.
I flew through this thing, it seemed like, for a
long time. It must have been more than five or ten
minutes, but
down below the trees. Pulled out a nice curtain and
beautiful sunshine. I pulled it up to about 3,000
feet and headed on toward Villasencio.
The sergeant, the crew chief had been sitting in
the co-pilot seat all this time.
He looked out the window and turned around and
looked over to me and he said, Lieutenant, there
are times when I wish I had never known you.
I said, well, we're going home right now. He said,
thank God.
Fine-sighted, real fine guy. So, we went on home,
but I covered that one. The thing that was
disconcerting about it was, on the last barrel of
gasoline, we got about half of it into the tank and
the damn wobble pump broke.
I didn't have another one. one of the things that
people would say, well,
you didn't make adequate pavilion because your
wobble pump broke. Well, maybe right. But if it had
broke three barrels earlier, we wouldn't have
gone home, or two barrels or one for that
matter. So from that particular spot in the
Amazon, could the Germans ever have built an
airplane that could have fueled and have enough
fuel, the capability to bomb the Panama Canal?
Yes, they could. Yes, they could have, all right.
So it was a realistic prospect? Oh, that meant the
prospect was real enough. It's just that the
intelligence is so bad, and it is so hard to come by,
that You need to be able to look into it so you can
quit worrying about it after a while, because it
just takes too much resources to worry about it.
But it was a bit of ingenuity that people find out
about, and so then they perceive you a little
differently, some with respect, some not.
Did you like being a diplomat? Yes, in most senses
of the word, and it certainly was good for me. I got
to meet and understand and work with all of the
governments and the presidents of those various
countries and the chiefs of all of their armed
services, particularly their air force. And I got
a lot of, made a lot of good friends, many of whom I
still stay in contact with. Most of them are dead
now because most of them were older than I was at the
time, but it was wonderful for me. Did you do any
training to help them start an Air Force or to help
them develop the training program? No, except in
establishing requirements. You see, when we were
doing training, we had another group of people
there that was an Air Force mission. and that was
not the responsibility we had to share. For
instance, in Columbia at the time that I was there,
we had a military mission there who was teaching
them how to fly a bunch of new airplanes that they
had bought from the United States. The man there,
the head of the mission, was a man named Whitson.
who was head of the bombardment section at Kelly
Field when I graduated in bombardment from Kelly
Field.
But he was an older man and was independent of
attachés.
Did they give you special language training when
you went down? No, I didn't have time. I spoke
Spanish fairly well from growing up where I did out
in El Dorado and working with Mexicans all along
and so I spoke pretty well and I had two years of
Spanish in high school. So, well I wouldn't want to
have a press conference necessarily in Spanish. I
could handle, I could get what I wanted and I get to
understand. Where were you When Pearl Harbor was
attacked? I was at about 14,000 feet coming from
Viva Centro into Bogota, Colombia. In other
words, I was stationed in Bogota at the time. When
you first heard about it over the radio? What were
your thoughts? What were your thoughts?
Well, my main thought, as it had been for some time,
was to get the hell out of there and get into the war,
because I was stuck in that State Department
intelligence setup and wasn't able to get out. And
my first thought was that those bastards can't
keep me here now. They're going to have to get me out
of here. Well, they did. It took another year after
that. Well, not a year. No idea. Yes, it did, too. It
took more than a year. Until December?